---
title: Court Reports
feed: 2024-07-08
---

This is a court report for St Bede's Fair. St Bede's Fair was
organised by Flintheath.

Insulae Draconis court was held by Roland and Jahanara.

This court report is for court on 25 May 2024, it's identified as
Saturday Morning Court.

Court report filed by: Court Herald, Alexandre d'Avigné

Their Highnesses Roland and Jahanara were pleased to hold court on the
opening morning of Bedesfayre, and having made their greetings they
recognised several members of Insulae Draconis.

Phil of Flintheath, called Renart, was awarded arms.  The Noble Renart
was roundly acclaimed by those assembled.

Aðisla Arnulfsdóttir, Euphrosyne Eirenikina, and Amy of Osgoldcross
were all admitted to the order of the Silver Martlet.   Although Fru
Aðisla was not in attendence, it was Their Highnesses' will to have
the award read into the record at this court, with the scroll to be
presented later at Strawberry Raid. (Which happened.)  The crowd
thought all of these awards were also great.

Also in this court, Their Highnesses welcomed newcomers and children,
and took oaths from those officers who had not yet sworn their oaths


-----


This is a court report for St Bede's Fair. St Bede's Fair was
organised by Flintheath.

Insulae Draconis court was held by Princess Jahanara Suren & Prince
Roland of Follifoote.

This court report is for court on 26 May 2024, it's identified as
Sunday Evening Court.

Court report filed by: Court Herald, Shannon of Honor Hill

Their Celestial Highnesses opened their court by inviting some
announcements from the event steward: Lady Rebecca of Flintheath who
thanked all those involved in the running of St Bede's Fair. Lady
Rebecca then announced the results of the Prize Play which took place
during St Bede's. The sponsors Lady Alessandra Di'Rario and Lord John
Yarrow called up their respective prize play participants: Lord Osric
the Just and Captain Kenneth Elliot who both attained their Provost
with aplomb.

Once the Huzzah's had died down, the rest of the events marshals gave
their reports on their respective activities. Lady Rebecca reported on
all the fencing activities including the results of the Novice Fencing
Tournament which was narrowly won by Taliesin Denet at his first
event. His Excellency Ranulf Il Norreis called up some of the younger
members of the Shire, namely Apollo, Lief Ranulfsson, and the absent
Zeva and James of Flintheath, who proved to be excellent small
Marshalls in arranging and running the Fighting Pits of Flintheath
where His Excellency Ranulf prevailed with an outstanding number of
points. The best non-belted fighter of the tournament was named as
Nick Cometborn, he of the lightning fast great-sword seen a few years
ago at the now legendary Coronet tournament in the fair city of
Norwich.

The reports continued with the archery marshals giving a spirited
description of the shoot that was held on the Saturday afternoon where
participants were asked to shoot the French spy stealing the English
horse, not the Horse. With special commiseration prizes given to those
who lost arrows by the ‘Robin Hood method’, The Honourable Lord Guy de
Dinan and The Honourable Lord Nero Lupo both receiving that
commiserating honour. The bravest to shoot that day was Lord Rowan
Wagstaff-Weston.

Although by this time they had already packed up and left, the
Equestrians were confirmed to be magnificent and very entertaining for
all who watched them decapitate, collect, skewer, stab, and generally
reduce the number of cabbages in the ring to mere leaves. When they
rode in earnest on the Saturday in ‘The Champion of St Bede’s’, Lady
Lilith de Grey on Sir Michaelmas was victorious.

Unfortunately this herald forgot that the participants in the A&S at
St Bede’s were wrangled and generally ‘marshalled’ in their efforts by
the good Lady Joanne Yarrowe, and so did not insist that she also
attend with the rest of the marshals in their announcements. I believe
all those in attendance can agree that if the efforts of Lady Joanne
in the arrangement of the A&S classes are anything to go by, she would
have had marvellous announcements as well.

So we move onto the most exciting part of any court, who got what…

Their Celestial Highnesses asked for all members of the Order of the
Fox to stand, whereupon the history and merits of the members of that
order were read out for all to appreciate. Once we had fully
comprehended the fullness of the award, Lord John Yarrowe was called
before their Highnesses to take his place in the Order. In a slight
deviation of customary proceedings, Lord John was asked to remain
before their Highnesses, while all members of the Ffraid were asked to
join the Fox in standing. The merits of the Ffraid were read out
before Lady Joanne Yarrowe was asked to join her husband before their
Highnesses to take her place in the Order of the Ffraid. The scroll
was penned by Lord John Yarrowe himself, along with the carved acorn
scroll holder. A beautiful piece of work. At that moment the Lady
realised why she had been a ‘scroll widow’ for the last few weeks, and
why Lord John had been so secretive throughout. Both new members were
celebrated with resounding Vivant’s before being allowed to return to
their seats.

Next the Order of the Silver Martlet were asked to stand, whereby
their skills and talents in bringing beauty and wisdom to the
Principality were extolled before Lady Àfriðr Eíriksdottir was called
to come before their Highnesses and join the ranks of the Silver
Martlet.

While this herald took a comfort break to imitate the warning system
used around our shores in the event of heavy fog, the court had a
moment to collect themselves, as this next one was big.

Their Highnesses called before them Their Excellencies Eularia Trewe
and Alexandre d'Avigne as they had words of thanks for their
Excellencies longstanding and faithful service to the Principality. As
the writ was so in depth and had so much to recommend it I have
reproduced it here below:

Unto Eularia and Alexandre late viscounts of Insulae Draconis do
Jahanara and Roland princes of Insulae Draconis greet you: good health
and peace be upon you.

Whereas we have been witness to your longstanding  services to our
principality, for you are known and beloved in the places wild and
northern and also in the south with its soft comforts, the fenlands of
the east, the castles of the west and among the people of Lough
Devnaree,

and Whereas you have made your home to abide within the fenlands of
Downham as part of our dear shire of Flintheath,

and Whereas blessed Edward the confessor of old granted a charter for
a market nearto the Great Ouse within the hundred and half of
Clackclose

Thus it is ordained, established and enacted by our hand and authority
before these witnesses that by this charter we Roland and Jahanara
confirm a mandate of our beloved servants Alexandre and Eularia to
hold a New Market

Item: you are to hold the market weekly at your manor in Downham;

Item: the market is to include a shambles for meats and a cross for
Cambridge butter and cheese;

Item: the mandate gives leave to host alien merchants from Nordmark,
Aarnimetsa, Frankmark, the Hansas, Zeeland and Bruges;

Item: You are to appoint a market clerk who maintains the Insular
weights and measures set by our chancellor, by which goods of all
merchants local and alien are weighed and sold within the market

Item: Merchants with ships, both great and small, or boats, who wish
to come by river Ouse,  and also those who want to bring any victuals,
stockfish and sturgeons excepted, may come by river to that town;

Item; merchants may stay in Newham, trade, make their commodity there,
and depart thence without let or hindrance of the sheriff, or any
other bailiffs or ministers of the coronet, provided they exercise
their trade in lawful manner, and do, as well to the coronet as to
others, the custom due and usual in those parts;

Further do we confirm license for an annual fair at your manor in
Downham. The fair may include the ancient plays by the guilds, and
also licensed performances such as they hold in London of Comedies,
Tragedies, Enterludes, and Histories, both true and feigned, For the
acting whereof you may erect certain publike places for the duration
of the fair.

Fencing masters, dancing masters, actors, artificers, whoores and
bawds, chavs, musicians, players and other low persons may stay for
the duration of the fair, after which they may not be suffered to stay
past night fall except that they pay a fee.

The fair is to be held upon the feast and morrow of St Thomas the
Apostle being 4th day of July, long known as a festival beloved among
the people of Flintheath, unless the fair be to the harm of
neighbouring fairs, great tournaments or holy pilgrimages.

As surety for this mandate and license, We are pleased to receive from
you sausages of the New Market totalling 1lb at our next court.

Done this feast day of the venerable Bede in the first year of our
reign by our hand and seal.

Wording by Dame Genevieve la Flechiere  
Research support from Master Nicholas d'Estleche and Dame Edith de Hedingham  
Writ by HE Euphrosyne Eirenikina

Bar a few comments about the 1lb of Sausages of the New Market, here
ended the court at St Bede’s Fair of Prince Roland and Princess
Jahanara their most excellent Highnesses of Insulae Draconis.

