---
title: Court report
feed: 2023-05-03
---

Insulae Draconis court was held by Prince Alexandre d'Avignon and
Princess Eularia at Bourn Again! Flintheath at Manor Farm.

This court report is for court on 28 May 2023, it's identified as Sunday court.

Court report filed by: Court Herald, Rebecca of Flintheath.

-----

They called forward and welcomed newcomers for whom this was their
first visit to the court of Insulae Draconis and gave them gifts. They
then called forward the children there present. Her Highness
especially thanked them for their service about the event and gave
them tokens and sweetmeats before dismissing them with the exception
of James of Flintheath and Leif Ranulfsson.

To Lief Ranulfsson they gave the scroll for an award previously given
by their Majesties. Having dismissed Leif, they then called the Order
of the Winged Pouch to stand. No members of the Order were there
present and their Highnesses called James to the Order.

Lady Trudie Griffin addressed the court, bringing greetings from the
Barony of Lochac.

Viscountess Euphrosyne Eirenikina, the steward of the event, addressed
the court to express her appreciation for the help and support of the
event staff.

The marshals addressed the court with the results of divers
tournaments held over the course of the event. Viscount Ranulf
announced the victor of the Armoured Pit; Lady Bella Donna announced
the victor of the Rapier Pit, Lady Katherine Glastonbury announced the
victor of the friendly equestrian contest, and Lord Kenneth Elliot
announced the victor of the Newcomers Rapier tournament. The victors
were called before their highnesses and honoured before the court.

Their highnesses called the Order of the Fox to stand and called
forward Lady Bella Donna, amid cheers, and Lady Rebecca of Flintheath,
amid tears, to join them.

Her Highness had particular words and a gift for Duchess Fiona on her
departure for a far-off land.

There being no further business, the court was concluded.
